DRMZ Web3: 
DRMZ Stake Pool. Web 3 Education. 
Events & Marketing
DRMZ secures and decentralizes Cardano with a superior stake pool operation, brings a fresh and 
passionate approach to web3 literacy & education,  web3 marketing, sponsorship, and event 
management, and firmly believes in the power of chasing after dreams.

Dream Cardano SPO (DRMZ) 
Pool ID: d71613e6097382e4d522fb17cff10b6c8bbe8575521ae174ba506c70
Stake DRMZ

About DRMZ Stake Pool
DRMZ is one of over 3000 stake pools that currently decentralize the Cardano 
blockchain.
1DRMZ Pledge
Our Pledge is now 20,000 ADA, up from 
10,000 ADA.
 We will continue to increase the pledge as 
DRMZ grows.
2 High Availability
We have deployed multiple nodes across the 
planet with no less than 4 dedicated CPU 
cores, 24GB RAM attached to High-Speed 
storage, and employing a BP-Node, 3 Private 
Relays, and 2 Public Relays.
3Guaranteed Security
Dedicated IT resources ensure security, 
redundancy, and continuous operation in the 
event of any host failure or crash.
4 Low Fee Structure
DRMZ offers low fees, 340 ADA Fixed Cost + 
1% Margin fee, which helps us meet 
operation expenses while assuring that you 
get the maximum returns from your 
investment.

Is staking ADA is safe?
100%! Cardano's "Liquid Staking" ensures:
Your funds are never locked, for any reason 1.
Your ADA remains in your custody, which is "delegated" to DRMZ from 
your private wallet.
2.
Cardano has no slashing mechanism 3.
*Learn more about staking 
Cardano.org

Why stake with DRMZ?
Earn Passive ADA Rewards (~5% APY) 1.
Support decentralization by staking with a single pool operator 2.
Promote wider web3 literacy and education 3.

We host monthly IRL Meetups & 
Twitter (X) Spaces
IRL Web3 Meetups
Join us at our favorite breweries across SoCal!
01:26
Y ou T ube
DRMZ  Cardano  Event  with  Crypto  Headz  in  San  Di …
DRMZ  is  a  W eb 3 Media  & Events  Co . | Join  the
# DRMZteam  by  delegating  your  ADA  to  DRMZ . Remembe …
Meetup Link: https://www.meetup.com/drmzteam/
Weekly Twitter Spaces
Join us every Sunday on Twitter Spaces: #CardanoMinistry

W ays to support DRMZ

NFTs
Note: funds made from NFT sales will remain delegated to DRMZ, increasing 
our total saturation (currently 0.2%) and strengthening our chances to be 
selected by "Ouroboros" to mint blocks for Cardano.
#DRMZteam 
NFT
How to claim:
Attend a DRMZteam Web3 
Meetup
1.
Delegate your ADA to DRMZ 
Stake Pool! 
2.
Cardano 
Ministry NFT
How to claim: 
Purchase for 25 ADA on 
NMKR
1.
Click here
DRMZ x KRYPTOTHREADZ 
Collaboration (NFT + Shirt)
How to claim: 
Purchase for 100 ADA 1.
Or, you may also purchase for 2 ADA + 2,500,000 $Krypto 2.
To receive your DRMZ T-Shirt, DM your token number to @KryptoThreadz 
on twitter or discord with your name, address, and shirt size to be able to 
receive the shirt
3.
Click here

Partnership & Sponsorship 
Opportunities
Web 3 Education
Gamified Education
As "DRMZ Academy," we are dedicated to 
creating resources, education, workshops, 
and more to actively promote and support 
web3 literacy. We offer a distinctive 
approach to web 3 education, making 
complex concepts comprehensible and 
accessible through our gamified web3 
education program.
Accessible Learning
Our ultimate goal is to empower individuals 
with the tools to embrace cutting-edge 
technology and pursue their dreams 
confidently. We offer multiple levels of 
information resources and workshops that 
provide comprehensive knowledge to 
everyone, regardless of their technical 
ability.
Experienced Instructors
We have experienced instructors from 
diverse experiences that can provide hands-
on instruction to help learners put their 
knowledge into practice successfully.
Community Support
We pride ourselves on maintaining a strong 
community presence and network of 
supporters in the web3 space.
We offer Education Packages
1 Education Packages
Curated comprehensive event packages 
available for separate purchase:
workshops, 
special networking events
options for video recording and 
production.
2 Personalized Delivery
Talk with our team about integrating 
blockchain technology into events and 
creating immersive experiences. 
Our expert staff helps ensure that your events are optimized to meet your business goals while 
engaging students & attendees.
Web 3 Events
1
Event Planning
Our team conceptualizes and designs 
events, working in close collaboration with 
clients to understand their goals and 
preferences. We create event proposals, 
suggest themes, and handle logistics like 
venue selection and budgeting, ensuring 
that we exceed your expectations
2
Event Management
Get event management service that ensures 
flawless event execution while you focus on 
engaging with attendees. Our team of 
experts coordinates with vendors and 
manages staff, handling operational aspects 
and troubleshooting any issues that arise, 
ensuring you conduct a successful event
3
Event Production
We provide event production services that 
handle technical and creative aspects, 
including audiovisual setup, lighting, staging, 
and sound systems to enhance the event 
experience. We also create visually 
appealing and engaging atmospheres that 
leave a lasting impression on your 
attendees.
We offer Exclusive Event 
Packages
1 Event Packages
Curated comprehensive event packages 
available for separate purchase:
workshops, 
special networking events
options for video recording and 
production.
2 Consulting Options
Talk with our team about integrating 
blockchain technology into events and 
creating immersive experiences. 
Our expert staff helps ensure that your events are optimized to meet your business goals while 
delighting attendees.
1 Metaverse Marketing
DRMZ promotes your brand in the immersive world through smart digital marketing 
techniques. Get your brand noticed in the virtual world with our expertise and solutions 
customized to your brand
2 Brand Impact Package
Unlock exclusive benefits, including prominent display on all event materials, websites, and 
premium banner placement on the main stage. Enjoy dedicated social media posts 
highlighting your brand, exclusive booth space for showcasing your products, and other brand 
recognition opportunities.
3 DRMZ Parlor
The DRMZ Parlor is an immersive ("Metaverse") platform with information about DRMZ and 
Cardano. Sponsorships include customized branding inside the webspace, where delegators, 
and friends of DRMZ can access more information about DRMZ and Cardano, engage with 
virtual booths from sponsors, and enjoy virtual galleries showcasing our favorite NFT projects.
Muse
RodG
New  building  & design

Join the #DRMZteam
We are dedicated to providing you cutting-edge solutions that meet your unique needs. 
Contact us today and experience the perfect blend of innovation and professionalism.